Hello and welcome to another episode of AWS Bites.
My name is Luciano and I'm joined by Eoin.
And we wanted to talk about DuckDB for a while.
And today we finally get to do just that.
So a few years ago, we started to hear lots of excitement
from our data scientists and analysts friends
and all colleagues and everyone was talking about DuckDB
and they were super excited
and we couldn't figure out exactly why.
But finally, we have used it in a few different projects
and now we really understand
why everyone is excited about that.
So today we want to share with you
how DuckDB is becoming a must-have tool
for anyone who has some data on a S3 bucket somewhere
and will need to do some kind of analytical job with that data.
So we'll share some use cases and how to get started.
And by the way, there is a little bit of a treat at the end.
If you are missing the recently retired S3 Select feature on AWS,
stay tuned until the end, we might have a surprise for you.
Hopefully a better option that you can use today.
So let's get into it.
AWS Bites is brought to you by Forteorem, our sponsor.
And if you're looking for a partner to architect, develop,
and modernize on AWS, give Forteorem a call.
You can check out all the details at fourtheorem.com.
So Eoin, maybe we can start by giving a little bit of an explanation
of what DuckDB is.
Well, it's a database, but specifically it's an in-memory analytical database.
So when you think in-memory, you might think of things like SQLite,
sometimes known as SQLite, but this is for analytical or OLAP workloads.
So you can therefore run it locally because it's in-memory,
but you can also run it in the cloud, basically anywhere.
And it's SQL first.
So anyone with knowledge of SQL can pick it up and use it really very quickly.
It works with a lot of different storage formats.
It has its own format, but you can also use it with Parquet, Iceberg, CSV data, JSON data,
Arrow.
And one of the really big draws of it is that it's very simple to use,
and it has managed to stay very simple to use.
It doesn't have any dependencies, works on pretty much any modern OS or CPU,
and it has language bindings for almost everything you might need.
It's also pretty modular.
So new features are automatically enabled by installing extensions,
and you can even write your own custom extensions as well.
And it's open source.
I heard an interview at one of the founders of DuckDB recently,
and they were talking about the different model, the governance model,
but they basically set up a separate foundation holding all of its IP,
keeping it clear of all the commercial entities
to ensure that the community doesn't get any nasty license-switching surprises in the future.
So that's the intro.
Luciano, what is DuckDB good for?
Yeah, you already mentioned that you can run it anywhere.
That's probably one of the main things worth to mention.
So you can run it on your laptop, on an EC2 instance,
in a container running, again, on your machine or somewhere in the cloud.
You can even run it in Lambda,
which is probably the coolest use case, if you ask me.
So one of the biggest benefits is how fast it is on modest hardware.
So you don't need to run it in high-end machines or buy expensive VMs.
You can run it pretty much in almost any reasonable hardware.
And it has a very efficient multicore columnar execution engine,
which is able to parallelize fetching and execution of the queries
that you provide to analyze your data.
So you can also work with more data than available in memory,
which is another interesting detail for something that is defined
as an in-memory database.
And effectively, we are used to massive clusters or data warehouse
required for querying big data.
DuckDB kind of changes that a little bit
because it solves a lot of the problem that we typically would solve
with these massive clusters,
but with a much simpler approach
and a much more cost-effective approach.
And I think that's probably one of the main reasons
why everyone is so excited about DuckDB.
So they say that one of the main reasons
why DuckDB can be so efficient
is that the engine is particularly well engineered,
it's a columnar vectorized type of engine,
and it can process large numbers of rows for a column at once.
So this is why it's very well suited for analytical type of workloads.
So because DuckDB can support more data than it can fit in memory,
you often hear stories of people processing terabytes of data,
even in their laptops.
And I'm seeing lots of small examples and use cases
of people talking online.
For instance, one common use case would be
if you want to reimplement your own version of Google Analytics,
people are trying to do that with DuckDB
and seems to be extremely easy to build
and extremely efficient and cost-effective.
So that's just to give you an idea
of the kind of things you could be building
with something like DuckDB.
So where do we get started?
Yeah, the best way to take it for a test drive
is just to install the CLI.
So you can do that for any Linux, Mac OS, Windows.
Once you do that, you can run the DuckDB command
and you have an interactive SQL REPL.
So you can start writing SQL
and you can run in memory,
which it would do by default,
or use a DuckDB file.
I think 95% of the use cases I've seen,
you're just using the in-memory case.
But there's a lot of advantages
if you want to persist the data as well.
So if you just want to query data on S3,
in-memory is fine.
You could start with something like select star from
and then just give the URI for your S3 object.
And that could be a single file
or it could be a group of files.
And then you can get into more complex stuff
like partitioning.
So if you're in the big data space,
you'll be familiar with hive partitioning
on stores like S3,
where you have certain parts of the path,
which represent basically partitions of data,
like date equals 2025, 02, 18.
And when you have those dates in your where expression,
it means it only has to read in that folder.
You can do that with DuckDB as well.
You can also create in-memory tables
for intermediate results
or indeed for assisted tables
if you're not using in-memory mode.
And then you can do joins.
And it has, you know,
very rich SQL support,
but it also has custom functions
for doing things like reading Parquet data
with specific parameters
and scanning lots of different partitions
on a store like S3.
So on AWS,
then if you want to start using it in your application,
there's lots of options for integrating it.
Lambda, you mentioned already, Luciano,
it lets you do simple and cheap data lake querying
or even ETL pipelines
if you're doing transformations.
That's one of the places
where I've found it very useful
because you can do ETL
a couple of lines of SQL
just running in a Lambda function.
And that's your job done.
You don't have to stand up
any kind of complicated
or just heavier ETL infrastructure.
And you can obviously run it in containers,
for example, on ECS, Fargate, EKS,
something like that.
You can use it in AWS Glue,
if you like, in your Python shell jobs.
And you can also integrate it into step functions.
And that's one of the things
that I've found it really good for, actually,
is putting it into step functions
to do one step in your step function,
which will do massive transformations
on a lot of data.
And you gave a preview at start.
You said that we might have an alternative
for S3 Select.
Unfortunately, S3 Select has been retired
since late last year for new AWS accounts.
If you have existing accounts,
you might still be able to use it.
But it was a very handy feature.
It was a console tool and an API.
That you could use from the SDKs
that would allow you to query data
on S3 directly.
It was quite a limited subset
of SQL supported in S3 Select.
You could basically just select
with a where clause on a single file.
But people really miss it since it's gone.
And the good news with DuckDB
is that you can replace it.
Essentially, you can use the CLI
as a drop-in replacement
for what you would have done
in the AWS console.
But you can also use DuckDB
as a programmatic replacement
for the AWS SDK usage of S3 Select.
And the good news is that
you'll have a lot more features
than you would have had with S3 Select.
So we'll talk a little bit about that more
because one of the recent use cases
I came across was
I wanted to use S3 Select
in a step function
just to do some filtering on data.
It was in a new account,
so that wasn't available to me.
And I was able to replace it with DuckDB
and get really good results.
So I'll come back to that in a bit.
But maybe we should talk about
before that how S3...
Sorry.
Maybe we should talk about
how DuckDB compares to other things
like Athena, SQLite, Pandas, Polars.
Yeah, let me try to give
a quick overview on that.
So comparing it to Athena,
DuckDB is much faster and simpler
in terms of setting it up
and the code that you need to write.
I think it's fair to say
that Athena will probably support
much more data
like if you are at massive scale,
but you can get very far with DuckDB.
And the reason why Athena
or even Redshift,
if we want to bring that
in the conversation,
they will support more data
is because they are large-scale
multi-node systems
while DuckDB is a single-node system.
So unless you want to write
your own crazy demultiplexer,
multiplexer type of approach
where you can shard
multiple nodes
and manage all that
querying in between,
I think DuckDB is more suitable
for things that will fit
a single node.
But I think with that,
you can still solve
lots of problems,
even at relatively big scale.
So that just keeps the comparison
between Athena
and even Redshift,
I guess,
versus DuckDB.
Another one that it's
very often compared to
is SQLite.
And I think it's fair to say
that these days
there is an alternative
called LibSQL.
So if you are not aware,
LibSQL is a fork
of SQLite.
So in a way,
it's very similar,
tries to solve
the same problems
as a slightly different
governance than SQLite.
But apparently,
I'm seeing it more and more.
So possibly,
it's going to eventually
become a big contender
in this space.
So both SQLite
and LibSQL,
if you compare them
with DuckDB,
I think the approach
is very similar.
So I think it makes sense
to compare them.
But at the same time,
they are trying to solve
very different problems.
So where SQLite
or LibSQL
are giving you
effectively an easy way
to have a local
embeddable
transactional database,
DuckDB is much more focused
on large-scale analytics.
So effectively,
the way that the data
is being stored
and retrieved
is very, very different.
And therefore,
I think you need to pick
the right tool
for the right job.
So if you're doing analytics,
stick with DuckDB.
Otherwise,
probably SQLite
will give you better results.
Then if we bring
into the pictures
Pandas
and the more recent
Polars,
which is pretty much...
So Pandas is
the original one
written in Python
and Polars is kind of
a more modern rewrite
written in Rust.
So more focused
on bringing,
I guess,
additional performance
that the Rust programming
language can bring.
So these are two
very popular
data processing
libraries
that are used
for analytics.
I think the use case
is very similar,
but the approach
is probably very different.
So while Pandas
and Polars
effectively are
programming languages
libraries,
so they offer you
like a programmatic interface,
you import a library
in a piece of code
you're writing,
and then you have
this concept
of an object
that represents
a data frame,
and you can use
this data frame
to do all sorts
of kind of things
using different
programming languages
like Python or Rust.
You write different
instructions,
effectively you write
your own script,
and that way
you can create
even fairly complex
analytical pipelines.
I don't think
those will be
completely replaced
by DuckDB.
I think on one side
maybe Pandas
and Polars
can give you
an extra bit
of flexibility.
Maybe people just prefer
the more programmatic
approach
so that there is
definitely a difference
in the things
you can do
and the way
you approach
the problem.
But with that being said,
I think you can
be able to replace
some of the work
that you might be doing
with Pandas and Polars
with just a query
or a single SQL
even in DuckDB.
So I think it's worth
figuring out
where is the sweet spot
where maybe DuckDB
will give you
a much simpler solution
and you don't have to
write and maintain code.
You probably just focus
on writing a SQL statement.
Yeah, I think
my rule of thumb
is like when you run into
multiple lines of SQL,
then eventually
it gets more complicated.
You feel like you're back
in store procedure land
in the early 2000s
and at that point
you might be better
off using something
a bit more imperative
like Python.
So you mentioned step functions before.
I'm really curious
to see how you use
DuckDB with step functions.
Yeah, I mean there's no way
you can create
like a custom
user-defined task
or state
in step functions
apart from using
something like Lambda
or a container task.
So I mentioned
that we had this issue
where we couldn't
use S3 select
and we trialed
using DuckDB instead.
It worked really well
and we actually decided
to make this
a general purpose pattern
so that anyone
can really easily
integrate things
like DuckDB
into step functions
and other workflows.
The way we did that
was creating
a Lambda runtime
for DuckDB.
And this might sound
a little bit strange
but here is out.
The layer allows you
to basically deploy
a Lambda function
that doesn't have any code.
So it just has
a DuckDB engine
and we created
this runtime
layer on top of it
that basically
accepts a query
and allows you
to then do something
with the results.
So it's really lightweight.
It's written in C
because DuckDB's
core itself
is written in C
so it was
fairly straightforward
to create a thin wrapper
around that written in C as well.
So it's very tiny
to deploy
quite lightweight
in terms of startup
and then you really
just have to incur
the analytical time
for whatever query
you're running.
So it means you don't
have to have a Python runtime
or a Node.js runtime.
You don't have to worry
about dependencies
and upgrades.
It's just a single binary
and you can then
use this
as a response
to an event bridge event
or integrate it
into step functions
and all of a sudden
then you have
the ability
to do DuckDB
in your step function
definition
and you can just
write your SQL
in the input
parameters
for the Lambda task
and interpolate
any variables
you might need
from your step function
state.
And we've been able
to use this
then for just
doing simple things
like taking
a CSV file
and converting it
into JSON
and then doing
something else
with the response.
But you can also
do different filtering,
grouping, aggregation
before you return
your JSON.
So it's really powerful.
It is,
I think it's worthy
of a runtime
because DuckDB
is so powerful
and you can do
so much with it.
And I think a lot
of us who use Lambda
heavily
are always looking
for ways to reduce
the number of functions
you need to maintain
because it just seems
like you've got
a lot of cattle
to herd then.
And this is a good
way to do it.
So we'll have a link
to the repo
in the show notes.
It's essentially
a SAR app,
so a serverless
application repository
app that you can use
to install
the runtime
in your own account.
And then you just
create a simple
function that you
can deploy.
You might need
to give it
some permissions.
So normally,
rather than returning
analytical data
in the response
of your function
invocation,
you might write
it to S3
just because of
the size of the data
or the format
of the data.
So you might want
to give that function
you deploy
some access
to S3,
like read access
to some buckets
and maybe write access
to a staging area
where your intermediate
results are stored.
And once you have
that,
you can do
some pretty mad
things with
DuckDB and step
functions,
like you can even
call APIs using
DuckDB because it
has an HTTP
extension and you
can even do
like authenticated
requests to APIs,
transform the response
in SQL.
You can convert
tabular data on S3
to JSON,
like I mentioned,
that you can then
use in your step
function state.
You can do
like fairly significant
ETL or ELT
type workloads
and then just
anything else in terms
of analytics
aggregation.
You know,
if you've got a
step function that's
doing a map
or even a distributed
map to process
lots and lots of
units of data,
you could then use
DuckDB to collate
all that data,
aggregate it all
together and get
results.
So, yeah,
I'm curious to hear
how people get on
with it and if they
can try it out and
find some really
good use cases
because it really is
kind of a Swiss
army knife type
tool and it's just
limited by your
imagination.
That's awesome.
I think this is
everything we wanted
to share today.
We believe as a
final conclusion that
DuckDB is really
good, really
promising,
probably we'll be
seeing more and
more of it and
especially in the
cloud, in Lambda,
in AWS.
So, hopefully you
got some value
from this episode
today.
If you did,
please remember to
share it with your
friends, like,
subscribe, everything
else and also
please give us a
star to our new
repository if you
like this project.
So, thank you very
much and we'll see
you in the next
episode.
and we'll see you next
big one.
Bye.